I'd like to introduce Allaire here.
Thanks. Thank you very much.
And thanks everybody for coming.
I'm here today to talk about publishing Jupyter Notebooks with Quarto.
I'm J.J. Allaire. I'm from POSIT.
Tracy will be in front. Just for Tracy. She's from POSIT.
POSIT used to be called RStudio.
So you may not have heard of POSIT.
It was probably the name of RStudio.
So, we're going to talk a lot about Quarto today.
But before we talk about Quarto,
I want to talk at a very high level about Jupyter Notebooks
and what is special about them.
And for those of you who are users of Jupyter Notebooks
or curious about Jupyter Notebooks,
passionate about Jupyter Notebooks,
I really strongly recommend you read this paper
that was written by Brian Granger and Fernando Perez
who actually created Jupyter Notebooks.
And they talk about what's special and distinctive about Jupyter Notebooks.
And of course, as we all know,
and we all probably benefit from all the time,
Jupyter Notebooks are an interactive computing environment.
But more than that, they, you know, my emphasis here,
help humans to think and tell stories with code and data.
Jupyter Notebooks' narrative and writing
are a fundamental part of using a Jupyter Notebook.
And it really is important in two dimensions.
How many of us have, when writing about how we're going to solve a problem,
that actually affects how we solve the problem.
Or writing about what we're going to do in the code
actually affects what we do in the code.
And how many of us have produced output,
a visualization, a model result, various figures,
but there's additional context required to understand what we produced.
And that's the telling stories part.
So reflecting a little more about this idea of telling stories
and telling the whole stories,
some of you may have read Edward Tufte's pamphlet,
which is sort of a takedown of the reductive style of PowerPoint
for communicating about data specifically.
He has a bunch of examples in the pamphlet.
One of them specifically actually has the PowerPoint deck
that was used to greenlight the ill-fated space shuttle launch.
And some of the figures they presented were very much presented in isolation
with some very, very short bullets on a slide.
And there's actually quite a bit of important context
that was needed to understand those figures.
So he's urging us to do more when we communicate about data.
Actually, a podcast that I just heard the other day
was an interview with Bill James.
How many of you here have heard of Bill James?
So you've probably heard of the movie Moneyball.
And Bill James was actually the person
who kind of started the revolution that led to Moneyball.
And anyway, he kind of invented sort of this idea
of deep data analysis of baseball and sports.
But he's actually, as things have gone on,
become kind of disillusioned with where that movement has gone
because it's also become quite reductive,
where people are obsessed with producing a single number,
wins above replacement,
that fully encapsulates the value of a baseball player.
And when he used to write and do data analysis about baseball,
he had quite a bit of narrative that went along with it.
So this idea of narrative that describe our assumptions,
constraints, qualifications, that go along with the data
and visualizations that we present
is really fundamentally important.
And that's this idea of telling stories,
computational narratives, telling stories about data.
And that's kind of where Jupyter fits,
and also, as you'll see in this talk, Cordo fits.
So before I get into some of the specifics,
I want to acknowledge there's quite a bit of history
in this building tools to help people
with sophisticated technical narratives,
interactive computing, weaving those together.
That goes back to tech, but it also goes back to notebooks,
various implementations of Markdown, Jupyter itself.
And all these tools have kind of, I think,
really weaved themselves together in recent years
to create a very compelling environment
for computational narratives and storytelling of data.
On to Cordo.
I spend most of my time now working on Cordo,
but prior to that, I worked on the RStudio IDE
along with Joe Cheng, who's here, I think,
and who you probably heard, some of you may have heard
get a talk about Shiny for Python yesterday.
So I worked on RStudio IDE.
I worked on RMarkdown, which was a predecessor to Cordo
that was R-specific.
And I also worked on the R interface to Python
and the R interfaces to a bunch of other
machine learning distributed computing libraries.
And I worked on RMarkdown for a long time,
and I became very convinced that the ideas behind it
were sound and valuable,
and customers were getting a lot of value out of it.
But I was discouraged by the fact that it was really
only a small slice of the people that could benefit from it
because it was R-specific.
And so I've actually spent the last few years
focusing on a new project, Cordo,
which is an open source project.
It's kind of a ground-up rewrite
of some of the things we did in RMarkdown,
but it's multi-language and multi-engine.
So we'll see this diagram a couple times in this talk,
and we'll go into different levels of depth about it,
but I want to give you a really, really high level.
What is Cordo?
It's taking computations and narrative
from Jupyter Notebook.
It's Markdown plus the code and whatever it produced.
That all goes into Markdown,
and then it's transformed by a tool called Pandoc,
which we'll talk about a little bit more.
It's a Markdown rendering engine,
into lots of different types of output.
That's kind of the core mechanic,
and we'll drill into more depth at these different steps
and what's important and how you can customize it
and hack the system.
So the core roadmap for what I want to cover in today's talk,
I want to talk a little bit more about
supporting the idea of computational narratives,
talk a little bit about the specific requirements
around technical communications.
This is distinct from writing in Gmail or writing in Google Doc.
We deal with lots of special types of content and assets
when we do technical communication.
This idea of semantic authoring,
where we can write once and publish in many places.
A little bit more getting into notebooks,
the pros and cons and different uses
and ways they can be melded and tooled.
And then a little more about how the system works
and how you can hack and extend it
and make it do exactly what you want it to do.
So first, how do we support computational narratives?
Well, the core requirements,
it's kind of what I just described.
You've got to be able to render executable content from Jupyter.
You've got to be able to include
these kind of technical content types.
You've got to be able to then take Markdown
and turn it into a lot of different output formats.
This is, you know, Porto does this,
but it's not the first tool to do it.
In fact, there's a tool called MVConvert
that's been around since the dawn of Jupyter, I think,
that does this sort of thing.
And then there's also a couple newer projects,
JupyterBook and Mist.js, that also do it.
So this talk, I'm going to focus very much,
kind of talk about the tooling for computational narratives
through the lens of Porto,
but it's important to know these other tools exist.
They share a lot of the same features,
and they're definitely all worth taking a look at.
So, how does Porto work?
You can see here at the command line,
where we have a notebook,
and we say, Porto, render the notebook,
and that kicks off this pipeline.
The notebook may or may not have been executed.
It could have been, you've already executed it
interactively in JupyterLab or VS Code,
or maybe that you'd like to fully re-execute it.
I'll show you this in a minute.
We're going to want to tailor the output
that we get out of the notebook
that goes into Word or a website or a PDF or a presentation.
We do that by providing options.
And then, what you see at the top,
once we have our notebook ready,
we just Porto render,
and we get the output that we're looking for.
Just a little bit about Pandoc
before I get into a bunch of examples.
Pandoc is really, by itself,
an extraordinary piece of software
that we're kind of building on top of,
and a lot of the reason why we're able to do,
implement a lot of the features
we're able to implement and support
all of the output formats we're able to support.
It was actually created not quite almost 20 years ago,
but over 15 years ago,
by John McFarlane,
who's also one of the folks who's behind CommonMark.
Pandoc has CommonMark,
plus a lot of extensions for technical writing,
definition lists, citations,
more sophisticated tables, things like that.
It supports dozens of output formats,
and I'll get into that later,
but just about any output format you can name
is supported by Pandoc.
And most importantly, it's very extensible.
You can write custom readers, custom writers.
You can filter.
The documents are read into an AST
that you can compute on.
So it's a great foundation
for building a publishing platform.
Okay, so let's start.
Let's do a few examples,
and this example will not be terribly impressive.
It's something you've seen before.
We start with a Jupyter notebook.
It's just printing a few rows from a table
and plotting, doing a plot.
And we take that and we render it into a web page.
You've seen this before.
Again, nbconvert, lots of tools do this.
Hopefully we made the web page
a little bit more attractive
than you might usually see,
but very straightforward transformation.
You see all the code,
and you see all the outputs.
Okay, so now let's talk about
the different ways you might tailor
this output with options.
Here we're actually gonna add
some document-level options.
We're gonna change the theme,
the sort of theme of the output,
the kind of overall CSS template of the page.
We're gonna change the code highlighting style,
and we're also gonna say that we want to
allow viewers of the document,
readers of the document,
to add comments to it using hypothesis.
So when we take this notebook and we render it,
we see now it has a different look.
The code is indeed highlighted
using a different highlight style,
and you can see on the far right
there's this commenting bar
that can be used for people
to make comments on the notebook.
So those are document-level options.
There's also cell-level options.
So I want to focus on the cell-level options,
but also note we've added
some different document-level options.
Here we've said we'd actually like to hide the code,
but make it folded so that users can see it if they want,
and we wanted to add some tools
for letting the users kind of globally enable
and disable source code.
So that's some different global options
or document options.
And then here we've said that we want to
provide a caption for our figure,
and we want to provide a label
so that we can cross-reference it.
So now when we render this,
you can see the code is indeed collapsed, folded.
There's this code menu up here
that we'll demonstrate in a minute,
and you can see that the figure does have a caption,
and it's cross-referencable.
When I open that code menu and say show all code,
and you can see the code cells open.
So these are just examples.
There's actually, believe it or not,
hundreds of options that affect
how documents look and behave,
and dozens of options that affect
how computations are presented.
It's extremely flexible and powerful.
This is just an example of sort of
how you interact with all those capabilities.
One of the things I want to emphasize is that,
again, you've seen NVConvert.
Making a web page from a notebook
is not particularly impressive.
GitHub does it, too,
when you view a notebook on GitHub.
But our goal is to go well,
well beyond simple conversion,
and some of those options that I was showing you
hinted that.
We want you to produce professional
production quality output in whatever format you need,
and complex outputs,
outputs like books, blogs, websites, presentations,
really nice printed documents.
All those things is our goal with the tool,
not just kicking out the web page.
So a couple examples of this.
Here I'm going to change the format to docx,
and now when I render,
I'm going to get a Word document.
I've got an option that says
I want to put the two plots side by side.
That would be a little annoying to do in Word,
and this just sort of does that automatically.
So that's Word.
We also have lots of tooling for creating PDFs.
Here I'll show you,
we're going to use a bibliography.
We're going to say
we actually want to put citations in the margin,
because the optimal reading width
is somewhere around like 600 pixels,
and so on a printed page actually,
you actually have extra room in the margins to do things.
We'll put the citations there,
and then we'll also,
we'll actually put our figures in two columns,
and we'll use the entire page,
again, using the margin.
So you can see here,
I've got my optimal reading width,
I've got the citation and the margin,
and then I'm using the entire width of the page for the plot.
So lots of tools like this
to make very tailored, readable output.
This presentation actually was created with Cordo.
We can create PowerPoint decks,
Beamer decks, and Reveal.js decks.
This is Reveal.js.
This is an example of creating slides,
and here I've said I want to put a logo on my slides
and include a slide number in the upper right-hand corner.
Here you can see now I've got a slide
that has the two plots, the logo and the numbers
that are indicated by the options.
This is just showing a couple of plots.
You might actually be trying to teach people
about how to code a plot.
That's a common application.
You're sort of doing an internal presentation,
trying to teach people how to use an API or a library.
And so here, we're actually going to say,
echo true, meaning please show the code,
and we actually want to highlight specific line numbers
so that as we're talking through the code,
the audience can focus on the right thing at the right time.
So here you can see we've got echo.
The code is shown.
Here, just line four is highlighted,
and then when I advance the slide,
it's going to highlight line five.
So this is a tool for sort of doing
technical explanations of code.
And there's lots of other things related to code
and slides that support internal presentations.
So far, I've just shown you single documents,
but Cordova also has a project system
for aggregating together multiple documents,
and that might be just sharing settings and assets like CSS,
or it might be to create a website or to create a book.
That's the project system.
So you can see here, I've got my Cordova project config file.
I say it's a website.
I provide some website options,
and then I say all the HTML that's in this website
should share this theme and these extra CSS styles.
That's a really simple project.
I'll show you some examples of some more sophisticated projects.
This is at the website for the Fast AI,
a deep learning for coders course.
Here you can see there's a little more going on.
This is pretty similar, but here we've got some social links.
We've got some tailoring how links to GitHub work,
and you can see now this is a full website.
So this is quite a few documents,
maybe 20 different documents linked to the sidebar.
You can also link to them in the nav bar and have the nav bar menu
or have a combination of those things.
So this is a whole website done with Cordova,
written, again, in notebooks.
Here's a blog.
Similar, we have some social stuff, Google Analytics,
a little bit in customizing the behavior of the nav bar
and when it collapses.
Here the home page looks a little different.
It sort of has tiles for all the different blog posts.
So this is a blog done as a project.
And then an example of a book.
Here you can see, again, some similar options
related to the Git repo that is where the books develop,
but also here now we've actually indicated the chapters
and the order of the chapters.
And then when we render the book, you can see we have the number of chapters.
We actually have the number of sections and subsections,
and we actually can resolve cross-references across chapters.
So one of the interesting things about books,
this book is a web-based version of the book,
but, obviously, it's not super helpful
if you actually want to print a book
or publish the book for Kindle or iBook users.
So books actually are multi-format.
So you can think of a book as a website that has extra features,
but you can also take that from the same notebooks
and produce a PDF book, a Word version of the book,
EPUB, or ASCII doc.
And ASCII doc is actually the format that's used by O'Reilly for their books.
So there's a bunch of people writing O'Reilly books using Cordo
and then just taking advantage of the ASCII doc output
and then feeding that to O'Reilly.
Okay, let's talk a little bit about some of the specific requirements
of technical communication and how Cordo supports those.
So what's different about technical communication?
I found this interesting that Google Docs now supports code blocks,
but that's as of, like, five months ago.
So if you're doing technical communication,
you definitely want to be able to display code.
So my point here is that tools like Microsoft Word and Google Docs
are not made for technical communication.
Sophisticated presentation of source code,
citations and cross-references, math, diagrams,
lots of things you want to do that are not well-supported
by general-purpose tools.
So how do we have support for these things?
I showed you earlier some of the things about code
and customizing the highlighting and making it hideable.
We've got some other things if you're trying to explain code
where if you've got, you know, here's a code block.
I want to explain these three lines of code.
I've got numbers next to them,
and then I've got narrative explaining each line of code below.
And the way you do that is you have your line of code
you want to write narrative about,
you have a list below, and so on and so forth.
So that's code annotation.
There's lots and lots of tools for customizing
how source code is displayed.
Diagrams, for those of you who haven't done this,
it's actually a pretty cool way to create diagrams.
You can actually write diagrams in plain text.
This is a mermaid diagram,
and in fact, GitHub now supports mermaid diagrams,
you know, in GitHub-flavored markdowns.
So if you want to write a diagram as part of a pull request
or on an issue or in GitHub wiki, you can use mermaid.
And then graph is an older text-based diagramming system
that's still in pretty wide use.
So this code here that I put in a quarter document or a notebook
results in this diagram.
So for those of you who have struggled with Visio
or tools like that to try to wrestle a diagram
into looking how you want,
this is actually a significantly easier way to do it.
Equations, of course, lots of times you need to use equations
in technical communication,
and here's a couple examples of LaTeX equations.
And then those get automatically converted.
You know, for Word docs, those get converted into MathML.
You know, for environments that understand LaTeX equations,
they state LaTeX equations.
So those are supported for all output formats.
I showed you a little bit before figures and cross-references.
Here I'm going to show a figure that actually has a caption
that's a figure and two sub-figures.
And to do that, I just say I've got a figure
and I've got two sub-captions.
And when I render this notebook, you can see it's got the figure,
but it's also got two sub-figures,
and those are referenceable individually.
And there's lots of ways to customize figure panels.
You can have two, three.
You can have two on top of two and two on top of one.
Lots of different ways to customize how figures are displayed.
I won't go into a lot of detail about this,
but there's quite deep support for citations and bibliographies
and lots of different output styles
and lots of different ways of presenting citations.
So that's one of the most significant kind of extensions
to Common Mark that PANOC makes
is the ability to handle citations really well.
And call-outs is another thing you see a lot in technical books
and technical communication.
You can see different types of call-outs that, you know,
in some ways they can amplify the importance of content,
but sometimes they can indicate to the user
that you don't really need to read this
unless you're a specific type of reader,
and we support call-outs
for just about all the most interesting output formats
that are targeted by Core Data.
I talked a little bit earlier about using the margins
because, again, the kind of optimum reading width
is not 800 or 1,000 pixels.
And so you can actually put content in the margin.
Here's an example of a notebook
where we put an equation in the margin
or even a figure or a table in the margin.
It's useful because there's ancillary information
that you think the user might want to consult,
but you don't want to burden the main narrative with it.
It's very easy to stick things into the margin.
And here's an example of a visualization.
It's, you know, it's a four-plot panel.
It really wants to be as wide as possible.
And so we're going to say use the entire screen
with a little bit of inset.
So now I render this in a web page.
No matter how big that web page gets,
it's going to use the full screen.
So let's really make sure this visualization
is seen as large as possible.
Lots of different options for how you use columns
with figures and other things.
All right, a little bit more about this idea
of semantic authoring.
What do I mean by semantic authoring?
Well, I'll define it a little bit by saying
what is literal authoring?
Literal authoring is writing or creating
technical content or report or analysis
kind of in the native format of a given medium.
So I'm writing a dissertation in LaTeX.
I'm creating a presentation with Keynote.
I'm publishing a confluence wiki.
And that's a lot of the authoring that we do.
But it has challenges.
I think one of the biggest challenges,
especially when you kind of like have notebooks
or like really high-value technical content,
they each have their own proprietary format
and it's quite awkward and time-consuming
to take what you've got in a notebook, for example,
and mark down and repurpose it
across many different mediums.
These tools typically have
mostly non-existent support
for the kind of technical content that I just talked about.
They usually don't have any mechanism
for including live code in its output.
So usually you're ending up copying and pasting.
And then when your notebook changes
or your analysis changes,
you've got to hopefully correctly update all your outputs.
And that's what I'm just alluding to.
There's no real straightforward way
to sort of automate or reproduce
computationally derived content.
So the idea, I think, is to move to,
and this is really what Jupyter notebooks do
and what Markdown does,
move to semantic authoring
where you don't literally double-click a word
and say, this is bold,
but you sort of write textually,
this is a heading, this is italicized,
this is code, this is a block quote.
And then the underlying rendering engine
can give it the right appearance
in a given target format.
So again, semantic structure,
really important when we get into talking about
how the system can kind of be hacked and customized.
Pandoc parses the document
into this abstract syntax tree
so the document is something we can actually compute on.
We can filter it, we can change it,
we can amend it,
we can do lots and lots of things to the document
after it's been parsed into this abstract syntax tree.
That is not something you can do, again,
with all these literal output formats.
But here, since we've got the document in this generic form,
it's very easy to compute on.
Many of the features of Porto
and many of the extensions that you might want to use or write
take advantage of this fact.
Let's talk a little bit about how that works with Jupyter.
As we said before,
Jupyter executes cells, creates this Markdown document,
goes into Pandoc.
Now, once it's in Pandoc,
it actually,
like I described,
it's an AST.
And you can write filters to transform the AST.
Again, that's how we implemented
many of the features in Porto,
cross-references, code-folding, layout,
all kind of computing on this AST.
And you can do the same thing.
And then the final output gets rendered from the AST.
Later on, I've got an example
of doing that with Python.
But Pandoc itself,
the power of having your documents
in this generic form
is that it now can create
dozens of formats.
I'm not showing all the formats that Pandoc has.
These are some of them.
There's the conventional document formats,
presentation formats,
many different varieties of Markdown,
wiki formats,
other formats you may or may not have heard of,
but actually end up being important in different contexts.
So it's an incredibly powerful and flexible system.
You can even write custom writers
to support systems
that it doesn't itself natively understand.
An example of this,
these are some things
that we added to Pandoc.
So Hugo,
many of you are familiar with that.
It's a very popular tool for building websites.
It uses its own version
of Markdown based on a library
called Goldmark.
DocuSource is another product
that is used to create also websites.
It uses its own flavor of Markdown,
MDX Markdown,
where each Markdown page is actually
an MDX application.
Confluence, you've probably heard of,
has its own XML format.
I talked about ASCII doc earlier.
None of these are actually supported natively by Pandoc,
but we extended Pandoc
to be able to target these.
So if your organization uses Hugo
to publish content and you have a notebook,
you can now,
with format Hugo,
take that notebook, turn it into Markdown,
and then have it work
within a Hugo website.
Similarly with DocuSource,
I've got the same notebook,
and I write MDX Markdown,
which is the formal Markdown understood by DocuSource,
and now my notebook shows up
in the DocuSource website.
Similarly, Confluence.
Lots of organizations use Confluence
as a core knowledge management tool.
It'd be great if we could push our notebooks
up into Confluence.
We wrote an extension of Pandoc
that takes that AST
and transforms it into native Confluence XML,
so the same notebook now just shows up
as a Confluence page
inside a Confluence wiki.
I talked before about
asking Doc to publish
books with O'Reilly.
Okay.
I want to talk a little bit about
Jupyter notebooks, and I think
people have different opinions about notebooks.
You've probably seen or heard of,
maybe even attended
Joel Grewe's talk, I Don't Like Notebooks,
from Jupyter's Conf 2018,
or Jeremy Howard's response,
I Like Notebooks.
A lot of controversy about notebooks,
a lot of hate, a lot of love,
and I think
the most important thing to recognize
is for all
the things they do well and don't do well,
they are really the corn of the realm.
They define
a standard container
for code output and related narrative
that you can compute on,
and that is really, really powerful.
The fact that a notebook
can be published to GitHub,
or it can be published to Colab
and interacted with.
It can be authored by lots of different tools.
It's also
a source of content for embedding
other documents.
Notebooks are very convenient for a lot of things,
and I think
they're a really important thing to build around
when we think about tools for publishing
data and data science.
I talked about
it as an authoring tool.
It's a REPL with embedded narrative
that's awesome for this idea of thinking
and telling stories with data.
Lots of different notebook
authoring tools are available,
and all the file formats
are completely compatible.
Now, for those of you
who don't like the idea of authoring
in a big JSON file, that's kind of one of the biggest
complaints about notebooks is,
wow, how do I diff them?
It's really gross that it's all in a JSON file
and you've just got code.
Why is it in this big monolithic JSON file?
You might not know that there's a package
called Jupytext, which actually has
not one, not two,
not three, but ten different
plain text formats to represent notebooks.
Some based on Markdown,
some based on just
a Python script that has special comments in it.
You can still use Jupyter
and Jupyter notebooks, even in
a plain text workflow.
Corda has its own variation of that.
This is the
QMD, or the pure
Markdown representation
of the notebook that we've been
showing for the whole talk, the Pong & Penguins notebook.
You can see it has
the metadata
options, it has code chunks,
it has Markdown, other code
chunks, cell options, all the
same things you saw in Jupyter, just in a
text file.
We have a VS Code extension
you can use, too. It gives you
some of the similar affordances
that you would expect in a notebook, like being able
to run a cell, or run cells above,
or run the next cell, or have code
completion, and things like that.
I think it's important when we talk about notebooks to think about it
as kind of an ecosystem,
a standard container,
and there's lots of different ways to author for them
and work with them
that aren't tied to the traditional
I-V format.
There's another scenario
which I think is really interesting, where
you
have a notebook that has a bunch of
computations, and it maybe has the results
of predictions,
or it has figures, or it has tables,
and you want to use that in
other documents, but still not
lose the connection back to the original notebook.
Here's an example of a notebook
that will not actually be published.
This notebook will not be the main document
that's published, but rather its outputs
will be embedded in another
document. You can see here this embed
or code.
Here's a QMD document.
It's got narrative,
and it's got this embed, which says
please embed a cell
from an external notebook right
here. When you do that, and then
publish it, it retains the
connection to the notebook. You can see,
I've published this document,
but there are source
notebooks behind it that you can link to,
and here you can see for this particular
cell, there's a source
cell for this figure that you can go
look at. Here you may want to,
for decision makers, present a narrative
and figures, but then you want
people to be able to go inspect the code.
When you click that link, you end up
navigating into the notebook view,
and here you can see the code
and all the narratives in the notebook, or even
download the notebook if you want to
run it and inspect it locally.
We're actually working with
some of those other projects I mentioned
earlier, JupyterBook, MsJS,
with Sloan
and AGU, kind of trying
to find a standard to let notebooks
be a standard part of the
scientific record. Let them participate
in peer review, don't lose,
preserve them as source materials
all the way through the process, and actually
have the code and the notebooks
be included in archives.
We're very excited about that.
A little bit to finish
up about how the system
works and how you can customize and hack
the system.
A little bit first about how we
interface with Jupyter kernels.
We execute code cells using
Jupyter. All Jupyter kernels
are supported. I would say that Python and Julia
are most widely used,
and they have probably the best tooling,
but I've seen people use the C
kernel, the Bash kernel, the APL kernel,
the SAS kernel, lots of different
kernels that I've seen
people use with Cordo.
One of the things we do is we want
working with these documents to be very interactive,
so we keep the kernels alive
for up to five minutes across renders
because the startup time can be long, especially
for Julia, it can be like 30 seconds,
so we keep the kernel alive so it's
fast and responsive. It's also
important to note Jupyter is not the only
execution engine we support.
The execution engine
part of Cordo is actually extensible.
We support the Knitter engine
for compatibility with our Markdown documents, and we
can add other engines in the future.
All the investment we're making in Markdown
and Pandoc and publishing outputs
works with Jupyter
now, but if there are other interesting execution
engines that come along in the future, we can plug
into this as well.
In terms of cell execution,
you do want to think about
how expensive it is to render
notebooks or render cells.
If you author an IPyB,
you can control exactly when execution occurs,
you can cache results in the notebook,
you can rerun all the cells or not rerun
all the cells.
If you author a text mode,
it's going to re-execute all the cells and have you
render in order, but there are
a couple, and we'll get into the details on these, there are a couple
of caching strategies available
to make that more reasonable.
It's really
use whichever execution
model and caching strategy makes the most sense
for your project. There's a lot of ways to customize it.
Filters are a really
important part of the system.
Filters essentially are
how we implement all the Porto features.
The document AST comes
in before it goes for final rendering,
and now the filter gets a hold of it
and it can do anything. It can generate content,
it can remove content, it can amend content,
it can add formatting, remove formatting.
Lots of different things can be done in filters.
I'm going to give you a really simple
Python example here.
There's a library called PanFlute.
We're rendering a notebook, and we've said,
please run this filter when you render the notebook.
You can see this is the full source
code of the filter, and really
the main thing that's happening, it's a really trivial
filter. This is
the only code that really matters here, which is
if you find a header and it's less
than level six, increase it.
It's just saying increase all the heading levels by one.
Again, a very trivial example,
but you can do very, very powerful
things with filters.
Like all this stuff.
Many of the features of Porto are implemented
with filters,
and that's
how we do a lot of the magic that we do.
Here's some examples of
third-party filters that have been
created for Porto,
Lightbox for HTML
documents,
a thing for showing proteins and trajectories
with Molestar,
social sharing buttons. Any feature you can
imagine, you can actually build a filter
for it and
extend the system.
Lots of different ways to write filters.
There's two Python libraries,
one by the creator of Pandoc, and then
Panfluid, the one I showed, has got
a little bit better API and more batteries included.
Pandoc itself includes an
embedded Lua interpreter, so you can
create very fast zero-dependency filters,
and then you can actually write filters
in any language through JSON
representation of AST.
We sort of have an extension
mechanism where you can publish
and reuse not just filters,
but also shortcodes, which are
a special variant of filters that's
like a content-generating macro.
You can build custom formats,
so some of the stuff I showed you before,
Docosaurus and
Confluence and things were sort of built
using our custom format mechanism.
You can add plugins to reveal JS
and also templates
for different types of projects.
Lots and lots of ways to build extensions
and lots of extensions available.
We actually have
integration with NBDev,
for those of you who don't know about NBDev,
it's actually a way of developing
Python packages entirely within
Jupyter, and it
automatically creates
CI
for running your tests.
It automatically
gives you the code
to publish your package to
PyPy and
Conda, and also
generates a website containing the documentation
of your package.
In version 2 of NBDev,
Porto is used to generate
that website.
Because Porto is an open-source command-line tool
and very customizable,
it's very easy
to integrate it with other toolchains
that you might be
working with.
That's my talk.
Thanks very much.
Hopefully, folks have got some questions.
I'd love to hear them.
Thank you.
I do have a blog in
Hugo, and I use Notebooks quite often.
That sounds really interesting.
It seemed odd to me
that you would put in the metadata
in the Notebook that the output
format is Hugo.
It seems that would be a Hugo configuration
thing to say, render...
In the case of Hugo,
you don't. If you put
a Notebook in a Hugo site,
it just knows to use
the Hugo format.
The project mechanism essentially
creates a format inheritance thing
where it's a Hugo project,
so a Notebook that's not otherwise specified
will render to Hugo.
Does Hugo use Porto by default?
You basically
add it, so you just add
Notebooks to your Hugo, and then you say,
Porto preview or Porto render.
It makes sure that the Notebooks are rendered,
and then Hugo picks them up
and uses them.
If we already have a website
that's run on Hugo and
just adds...
You can completely
do that.
It'll just go right in there.
The graphics and the pictures
and stuff, will it in the static?
It uses a feature
of Hugo called page bundles.
Page bundles is where you put
an article or post in its own directory,
and when you put the index.md,
when you do that,
it actually copies the whole directory to static
for you, so you don't have to coordinate
over an asset.
Do you have any features associated
with this process in transclusions?
I don't think so.
I have a question about
which article
formats are supported
on Porto.
Are they mostly the Hyopack
ones, like Nature?
Yeah, so there's a thing.
There's a GitHub portal called Porto
Journals, where we basically created
a bunch of... We probably got
a dozen or so.
I think Nature's
in there. We did five or six
and then the community contributed another six
or seven, and that will grow over time.
It's not difficult
to create your own. A lot of times, users
decide they want to publish to a journal with
Porto, and then they just make the template
based on the journal's
LaTeX template.
So, anyone
you want to be supported can be supported.
Some of them are already there, and some of them you have to
make your own template.
Has there
actually been any tool developed
to convert LaTeX
to Porto?
Well, you can... So Pandoc
can read, can parse
LaTeX and create markdowns from it.
It's obviously not going to
be able to take completely
arbitrary LaTeX and always do the right thing.
But for basic things,
basic formatting, tables, headings,
structure,
it can convert, yes,
it can convert LaTeX into a markdown.
And even
tame, notoriously horrible
LaTeX tables?
Maybe. I don't know. It has
a table parser. The
developers at Pandoc are very
sophisticated about LaTeX, and so
I don't know how good the table parser is, but I know
they work hard at it.
All right. Thank you.
Okay. I'm sorry
we're out of time. Let's give a big round of applause
to...
applause